rest api design document created (#25)
perrymant/moneymaker: design/api-specification-design.md

# api-specification-design
Personal notes about REST API design [here](https://github.com/perrymant/learning-notes/blob/master/17-rest-api-design.md)

## HTTP Headers for all methods:

> Content-Type: application/json

Reviewer: I wonder if this is an unnecessary abstraction - keep all the headers expected for the requests and responses along with their respective bodies.

Case in point: GET requests don't have the content-type header set, typically

Accept: application/json

> ## 1. help

Reviewer: Help is not something you care about for HTTP APIs really - only CLIs: CLIs may are often used directly by the user, whereas a HTTP API is used by another program and there is rarely anything useful to gain from a program telling its user the help instructions from another program (the API).

Let's simplify to only have report and adding a new transaction

OPTIONS:
    transaction [<amount>]["<description>"][<date>]
        To add credit you must add a description.
        If no date is provided then the current date will be used.
    report
        The report command will print out all transactions in a table.
    help
        This documentation.
EXAMPLES:
    moneymaker transaction 125 "Got paid" 2018-01-01
    moneymaker transaction 125 "Got paid" 2018-01-01
    moneymaker transaction -72 "Paid bill"
    moneymaker report

    *** Output ***
        ╔════════════╤══════════════════╤════════╤═════════╤═════════════╗
        ║ Time       │ Transaction Type │ Amount │ Balance │ Description ║
        ╠════════════╪══════════════════╪════════╪═════════╪═════════════╣
        ║ 2018-01-02 │ DEBIT            │ £0.72  │ £1.78   │ Paid bill   ║
        ╟────────────┼──────────────────┼────────┼─────────┼─────────────╢
        ║ 2018-01-01 │ CREDIT           │ £1.25  │ £2.50   │ Got paid    ║
        ╟────────────┼──────────────────┼────────┼─────────┼─────────────╢
        ║ 2018-01-01 │ CREDIT           │ £1.25  │ £1.25   │ Got paid    ║
        ╚════════════╧══════════════════╧════════╧═════════╧═════════════╝
```

## 2. report

> The user asks for `report` and obtains the report of their account.

Reviewer: We still don't have a notion of a user, do we? Let's explicitly assume that all users are using the same account then for the purposes of this document.

#### Request
| Method | URL |
|--------|-----|
| GET   | api/report/ |

#### Response
- 200: a `report statement` will be sent:

> `{

Reviewer: Use triple backticks with a filetype of JSON for better formatting.

Remember that JSON != JavaScript objects, and all your keys (LHS of `:`) will have to be `"strings"`.

Applies throughout.

>     status : "success",

Reviewer: I'm not sure this `status` key offers any more insight than the status code does. Consider getting rid of it.

    data : {

>         "report" : "---report statement---"

Reviewer: what does the report statement look like?

     }
}`

> - 400:  ">Error: Invalid argument: `moneymaker help` >for more info.":

Reviewer: How can we have an invalid argument when hitting `/api/report`? There are no arguments.

I think this 400 is more applicable for `transaction`.

`{
    "status" : "fail",
    "data" : { "Error" : "Error: Invalid argument:\nmoneymaker help \nfor more info." }
}`

- 500:  "Something went wrong. Please try again later.":

`{
    "status" : "error",

>     "message" : "Unable to communicate with database"

Reviewer: The client of a REST API should *never* be informed of the internals of what went wrong. Can you think of why?

In this case we should just return the same generic error message each time.
> "Something went wrong. Please try again later."
is perfect

}`

`report statement` for status code 200:

## 3. transaction
The user makes a transaction and sends it to update their account.

#### Request
| Method | URL |
|--------|-----|

> | PUT   | api/transaction-amount-description-date/ |

Reviewer: I think POST is the best verb to use here. POST used when creating something new. PUT is generally used for updates.

> | PUT   | api/transaction-amount-description-date/ |

Reviewer: This is an awkward URL. I'd expect this to just be `POST api/transaction` really.
If we have to list all the arguments we expect then this will probably not age well, in that adding more transactions means changing the URL. Can you think of a reason why this might not be desirable?

#### Response

- 200: A `transaction statement` will be sent:
`{
    status : "success",

>     data : {

Reviewer: What's the reasoning behind having this `data` wrapper key? Why not just return

```json
{
  "transactions": [...]
}
```
directly?

           "transactions": [
             {
               "description": ...,
               "date": ...,
               "amount": ...,
               "transactionType": ...,
               "balance": ...,
             },
             ...
           ]
           }
}`

- 400:  ">Error: Invalid argument: `moneymaker help` >for more info.":

`{
    "status" : "fail",

>     "data" : { "Error" : "Error: Invalid argument:\nmoneymaker help \nfor more info." }

Reviewer: Let's try and be kinder and let the user know what actually went wrong, since we don't want a 'help' endpoint. E.g. "amount missing"

# api-specification-design
Personal notes about REST API design [here](https://github.com/perrymant/learning-notes/blob/master/17-rest-api-design.md)

## 1. report
The `report` request obtains a report of their account.

#### Request
| Method | URL         |
|--------|-------------|
| GET    | api/report  |

#### Response
- 200: a `report statement` will be sent:

```json
{
    "data" : {
        "report" : "---report statement-(see below)---"
     }
}
```

> An example `report statement` for status code 200 :

Reviewer: So let's think about the purpose of this API, and APIs in general.

Right now we're saying that we should return this nicely formatted string of transactions. This makes quite a big assumption:

> The server decides how the client should present the data.

With this approach, the client has two options:

1. Display the data exactly in the format that the API gave it. Line endings and font spacing be damned.
1. Try and parse the data out of this custom string format into more manageable data structures.

This defeats the purpose of the problem that APIs try and solve. There's no need for the API to know how the data is presented. It only needs to care about the data itself, and organise it in a logically way. Like JSON!

See if you can come up with an alternative representation of this list of transactions in JSON.

Hint: We're somewhere between 80% and 100% of the way there with the work we did around persisting the transactions to a file.

```
╔════════════╤══════════════════╤════════╤═════════╤═════════════╗
║ Time       │ Transaction Type │ Amount │ Balance │ Description ║
╠════════════╪══════════════════╪════════╪═════════╪═════════════╣
║ 2018-01-02 │ DEBIT            │ £0.72  │ £1.78   │ Paid bill   ║
╟────────────┼──────────────────┼────────┼─────────┼─────────────╢
║ 2018-01-01 │ CREDIT           │ £1.25  │ £2.50   │ Got paid    ║
╟────────────┼──────────────────┼────────┼─────────┼─────────────╢
║ 2018-01-01 │ CREDIT           │ £1.25  │ £1.25   │ Got paid    ║
╚════════════╧══════════════════╧════════╧═════════╧═════════════╝
```

- 500:  "Something went wrong. Please try again later.":

```json
{

>     "status" : "error",

Reviewer: Still don't think this property adds any value.  Let's get rid of it throughout.

    "message" : "Something went wrong. Please try again later."
}
```

## 2. transaction

> A `transaction` request sends it to update their account.

Reviewer: I don't understand this sentence...?

Is this closer to what you mean?
```suggestion
A `transaction` request is sent to append a new transaction to an account.
```

#### Request
| Method | URL             |
|--------|-----------------|
| POST   | api/transaction |

#### Response

- 200: A `transaction statement` will be sent:
```json
{

>   "transactions": [...]

Reviewer: but what does this look like? Is it the same as `report`?

}
```

> - 400:  ">Error: Invalid argument: `moneymaker help` >for more info.":

Reviewer: `moneymaker help` doesn't make sense in an API. You can just delete the sentence, or explain how this could happen in plain English.

```json
{
    "status" : "fail",
    "data" : { "Error" : "Error: amount missing" }
}
```

- 500:  "Something went wrong. Please try again later.":

```json
{
    "status" : "error",

>     "message" : "Unable to communicate with database"

Reviewer: We shouldn't share this of information with the client for security reasons.

# api-specification-design
Personal notes about REST API design [here](https://github.com/perrymant/learning-notes/blob/master/17-rest-api-design.md)

## 1. report
The `report` request obtains a report of their account.

#### Request
| Method | URL         |
|--------|-------------|
| GET    | api/report  |

#### Response
- 200: a `report statement` will be sent:

```json
{
    "data" : {

>         "report" : "---report statement-(see below)---"

Reviewer: No need to delegate. Just include it here.

     }
}
```

An example `report statement` for status code 200 :
```
{
"report": [
  {

>     "date": ...,

Reviewer: We're missing the good bits!
What's the format of the date? ISO8601 is always a good choice.
How is the amount and balance given? In pence or as a decimal? Or another format entirely?

    "amount": ...,
    "balance": ...,
    "description": ...,
  },
  ...
]
}
```

- 500:  "The server failed to fulfill an apparently valid request.":

```json
{
    "message" : "Something went wrong. Please try again later."
}
```

## 2. transaction
A `transaction` request is sent to append a new transaction to an account.

#### Request
| Method | URL             |
|--------|-----------------|
| POST   | api/transaction |

#### Response

- 200: A `transaction statement` will be sent:
```
{
"transaction": {

>     "date": ...,

Reviewer: Same comment as for the report. Be explicit about this format.

    "amount": ...,
    "description": ...,
  }
}
```

- 400:  "The request contains bad syntax or cannot be fulfilled.":

```json
{
    "data" : { "Error" : "The request contains bad syntax or cannot be fulfilled." }
}
```

- 500:  "The server failed to fulfill an apparently valid request.":

```json
{

>     "message" : "The server failed to fulfill an apparently valid request."

Reviewer: Perhaps it would be easier non-localised English for now, and change the wording to avoid certain words: "fulfill" (simplified English) vs fulfil (traditional English).

}
```

> 

Reviewer: Excessive whitespace

#### Response
- 200: a `report statement` will be sent:
```
{

> "data" : {

Reviewer: I still don't think we need this outer 'data' field.

Let's have an actual example here. You can document each field individually outside of this payload if you want to. Think of this as something you can copy and paste as a valid payload.

Also, let's be consistent with indentation (e.g. 2 spaces):

```json
{
  "report": [
    {
      "date": "2018-11-28T17:34:45Z",
      "amount": 1234,
      "balance": 12345678,
      "description": "blah"
    }
  ]
}
```

Applies below as well.
